Nakheel Properties (Arabic: , romanized: nakhl, lit.'palm tree') is a real estate development company based in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. The formal name of the company is Nakheel PJSC (private joint stock company) and it was a subsidiary of Dubai World and a private state-owned enterprise.Nakheel was seen as key to resolving Dubai's debt crisis in 20092010. The company has been reported to be the second-largest property developer in Dubai after Emaar Properties.

History
Nakheel was founded in 2003 as a subsidiary of state-owned Dubai World and a private state-owned enterprise.The company was involved with a sukuk, which raised legal issues in 2009. This sukuk has been the subject of academic study. It was reported to be the largest ever sukuk.In 2010, Sultan Ahmed bin Sulayem was replaced as chairman of Dubai World. The same year, the company started payments for creditors. In 2011, the company undertook 59 billion dirham ($16 billion) of debt restructuring. On 6 July 2011, Dubai Worlds board of directors announced that Nakheel's legal ownership would be transferred to the Government of Dubai upon completion of the company's financial restructuring. In 2012, the company was the subject of a study by the American University of Sharjah on corporate governance along with Tamweel.In 2013, the ruler of Dubai, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, approved US$898 million of funding for the company and ordered work to start on two major projects on the Palm Jumeirah. In 2017, the company achieved $1 billion net profit in nine months, delivering 1,200 units with 23,000 under construction in Dubai. The same year (2017), Nakheel awarded a $410 million contract for the Palm Gateway to the company Shapoorji Pallonji Mideast to construct a three-tower residential, retail, and beach club complex.In January 2020, Mohammed Ibrahim Al Shaibani took over as chairman from Ali Rashid Lootah. In May 2020, it was reported that some employees' salaries were cut between 30 and 50 percent for senior staff due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In November 2020, Naaman Atallah was appointed as the company's chief executive officer.In September 2022, Nakheel rebranded, unveiled a new logo. The same month, the company also made announcements regarding previously frozen projects, including Palm Deira, which the company restarted in August 2022, and which was renamed as Deira Islands, then changed to Dubai Islands.
After a $4.6 billion debt restructuring deal, Nakheel is set to relaunch the Palm Jebel Ali project, having stalled since 2008, building 1,700 villas and 6,000 apartments on the man-made islands, having previously contacted existing investors offering to buy back their contracts for plots and properties.

Financial crisis of 20072008
Nakheel prospered until the financial crisis of 20072010 started a decline in Dubai's real estate market, putting Dubai World at risk of bankruptcy in November 2009. After write-downs of real estate values and lower sales, Nakheel had made a loss of 13.4bn dirham ($3.65 billion) in the first half of 2009, and despite a cash bail-out in May, the company sought to delay the December repayment of a $3.5 billion bond. This happened because Dubai's government refused to bail out Nakheel's parent company, due to which it requested a stay on debt payments, and consequently it was downgraded to junk status. However, on 14 December 2009, in the nick of time, neighbouring Abu Dhabi invested $10bn in Dubai, warding off Nakheel's debt default, and in March 2010, the government of Dubai rescued Dubai World, providing $9.5bn to help ensure Nakheel bond-holders would be paid on time and in full. The move was seen as key to resolving Dubai's debt crisis: "Fix Nakheel, and you go a long way to fixing Dubai real estate; fix real estate, and you fix Dubai," said Aidan Burkitt, hired from Deloitte to be Dubai World's chief restructuring officer.

Portfolio
Nakheel Properties has a portfolio of projects in Dubai across the residential, retail, hospitality and leisure sectors. Property development projects include:

Retail project developments include Ibn Battuta Mall, Dragon Mart 1 and 2, Golden Mile Galleria, Nakheel Mall, The Pointe, Deira Mall, Deira Islands Night Souk, Warsan Souk, Al Khail Avenue, The Circle Mall and Nad Al Sheba Mall, as well as extensions to Dragon Mart (renamed Dragon City) and Ibn Battuta Mall.
Nakheel has also developed properties outside Dubai, in Montenegro for example.

Dubai-based Nakheel is a world-leading master developer whose innovative, landmark projects form an iconic portfolio of master communities and residential, retail, hospitality and leisure developments that are pivotal to realising Dubais vision. 
Nakheels waterfront projects, including the world-famous, award-winning Palm Jumeirah, have added more than 300 kilometres to Dubais original, 70km coastline, paving the way for the development of hundreds of seafront homes, resorts, hotels and attractions.
Nakheels master developments span 15,000 hectares, accommodate nearly 300,000 people and provide a growing range of destinations, attractions and facilities for Dubais citizens, residents and tourists. They include Palm Jumeirah, The World, Jumeirah Islands, Jumeirah Park, Jumeirah Village, Al Furjan, The Gardens, Discovery Gardens, Jebel Ali Village, Dragon City, Nad Al Sheba Villas, Warsan Village, International City and the upcoming Dubai Islands  a new destination for tourism, living and leisure at Dubais oldest, most traditional trading hub.
Nakheel Malls owns and operates a diverse range of world-class retail experiences with a distinct portfolio of iconic destinations, including large-scale shopping centres and retail Pavilions, across Dubai.
Nakheels existing retail developments (also known as Nakheel Malls) in Dubai include Ibn Battuta Mall, Dragon Mart, Nakheel Mall, Golden Mile Galleria, The Pointe, Club Vista Mare, Souk Marfa, Souk Warsan, The View at The Palm as well as six community retail centres, known as Nakheel Pavilions.
An iconic experience in the heart of Palm Jumeirah, Nakheel Mall offers over 300 shops, restaurants, entertainment outlets and services, including a 15-screen cinema complex and other attractions across five floors.
The food meets fashion retail destination offers an eclectic collection of brands and experiences. Nakheel Mall offers an enhanced shopping experience, through its major attractions such as the interconnected Palm Monorail, The Rooftop as well as The View that connects the mall to the most iconic views in Dubai.
The worlds largest themed shopping mall, Ibn Battuta Mall, is designed around the travel experiences of renowned Arabian explorer, Ibn Battuta. At Ibn Battuta Mall, shopping, dining and entertainment come together with history, culture, and the story of a remarkable adventure. The mall features six mesmerizing individual courts India Court, Persia Court, Egypt Court, Tunisia Court, Andalusia Court and at the centre of it all is one of the most seaworthy vessels of its time  a Chinese Junk situated in China Court. Its homage to the great traveller and his remarkable adventure.
The Pointe is an iconic waterfront dining and entertainment destination on Palm Jumeirah where you will be spoilt for choice when it comes to dining options. Spanning 1.4 million square feet with a mix of food, entertainment and lifestyle offerings.
The Pointe is home to a 1.5km promenade, a dine-in cinema by Reel Cinemas, a childrens play area, supermarket, gyms, beauty salons and unique gifting concepts, as well as a car park for 1,400 vehicles. The Pointe is also home to The Palm Fountain that holds the Guinness World Record for The Worlds Largest Fountain.
Circle Mall, the newest community mall by master developer Nakheel, opened its doors in April 2021. Located at Jumeirah Village Circle, just off Hessa Street, the mall is a family-friendly destination for residents of JVC and nearby areas, with leading retailers, food and entertainment brands.
Circle Mall spans 532,000 sq ft and opens with a collection of brands including Spinneys supermarket, Nesto Hypermarket, Daiso, Medicina Pharmacy, Du, Etisalat and everything a community needs for convenient shopping close to home.
The rooftop, which will be home to the first community club in JVC, will feature state-of-the-art amenities, including an outdoor pool, two tennis courts and McCaffertys, a new Irish restaurant concept which will complement a host of other coffee shops and dining options.
Palm West Beach is a walkable waterfront destination at Palm Jumeirah for all-day entertainment, with water sports, a range of premium hotels and restaurants, water sports, and the best Dubai skyline views. Palm West Beach is home to 300 illuminating palm trees and is a pet friendly destination that stretches across 1.6km of promenade and beachfront.
A premium waterfront dining and beach club facility, Club Vista Mare is one of the Palm Jumeirahs most popular destinations for both residents and tourists. It spans almost 50,000 square feet at ground level, with an additional 30,000 square feet of residential space on the first floor. Upscale lifestyle and dining destinations serve a fabulous range of Middle Eastern, Greek, Spanish and other cuisines. Each restaurant has indoor and outdoor terrace seating, with some featuring space directly on the beach.
The View at The Palm is a stunning new public observation deck towering 240 metres above Palm Jumeirah, on the 52nd floor of The Palm Tower. The attraction is the only location in Dubai offering the unique experience of spectacular views of Palm Jumeirah, the Arabian Gulf and the Dubai skyline, along with an interactive experience about the making of Palm Jumeirah.
Visitors to The View will start their journey at the roof plaza of Nakheel Mall. From there, an elevator, complete with a floor-to-ceiling digital sea, sand and sky experience, will take them on the three-minute ascent to the observatory at the top of The Palm Tower, where they can marvel at the island beneath them and enjoy 360-degree views of Dubai. Visitors can take this experience to new heights at The Next Level, a stunning private viewing space, 250 metres above ground,  the highest vantage point on Palm Jumeirah.
Golden Mile Galleria is a retail and dining destination which offers doorstep convenience for thousands of Palm Jumeirah residents. Located beneath the Golden Mile residential complex and adjacent to the beautiful Al Ittihad Park which awaits you at the entrance, Golden Mile Galleria offers 400,000 square feet of retail space and 1,600 underground parking spaces.
Located in Dragon City, Dragon Mart is the largest Chinese retail trading hub outside mainland China. The 1.2 kilometre long dragon-shaped Dragon Mart is divided into seven zones with over 3,500 stores offering a wide variety of products.
Dragon Mart 2 is the retail and lifestyle extension of Dragon Mart and one of the most popular family shopping, dining and entertainment destinations in Dubai. The 2.1 million square feet extension offers 1.1 million square feet of leasable space and features 570 new shops, 520 kiosks, restaurants and entertainment outlets, as well as a 12-screen Novo Cinema complex, food court, Dragon Drive and separate terrace with indoor and outdoor dining options.
Nakheel Pavilions are dedicated retail centres designed to meet the needs of each of our communities. Each pavilion features a supermarket, convenience stores, restaurants and other amenities for on-the-doorstep shopping and recreation. The Pavilions are Al Furjan Pavilion and Badrah Pavilion.
Souk Al Marfa, the waterfront wholesale souk and marketplace at Deira Islands, features 400 stores across various categories. Designed as an indoor marketplace, the fully air-conditioned souk is a centralised, one-stop-shop, stretching 1.9 kilometres along the waterfront.
Souk Al Marfa brings together businesses from local and international backgrounds in the form of small kiosks, retail stores, showrooms, and street food markets. Shop for a range of items, including carpets, lights, spices, fashion, electronics and more, and explore the authentic Thai Market offering Thai food, handicraft, street food and clothing. It also features Mohideen supermarket and fast-food restaurants.
Souk Al Marfa provides affordable growth opportunities to traders across the country, with the potential to ship and import directly to its shops and pavilions, and promises a diverse, large-scale shopping experience for customers. When fully operational, Souk Al Marfa will be the UAEs largest wholesale souk and waterfront destination.
Souk Warsan with 650,000 sq. ft. of retail space, the souk will be spread across eight buildings, each comprising two floors of retail with three-bedroom townhouses built above.
This documents contains customer reviews of Nakheel's retail developments and it was scraped from google maps reviews
The customer reviews include the rating, location, date and review.